# ACID

* Atomicity;
* Isolation;
* Consistency;
* Durability.

Four fundamental principles of any database.

## Transaction

* Collection of queries;
* One unit of work.

Lot of real-life problems couldn't be solved with one request so it's important to be able to treat multiple queries as one unit of work.

Start: `BEGIN` - do changes in transaction.

End: `COMMIT` - do persistence commit - transaction completed.

`ROLLBACK` - forget about all changes, don't persist them.

Different databases might be optimized for different things. E.g. Postgres optimized for commits - transactions are really fast there.

Read-only transaction is the option too - e.g. to get consistent snapshot of time of transaction. If something changed by concurrent transaction - you will be isolated by using read-only transaction.

Single queries are also a transactions, they are just committed immediately.

## Atomicity

* All queries in transaction must succeed;
* if one query fails - all prior queries (even successful) should rollback;
* if database crashed before commit - all queries should rollback (databases do this automatically after restart).

## Consistency

Traded in different platforms: SQL vs NoSQL vs Graphs.

* Consistency in data - state of data that persisted;
  * is it correct? (non-atomic operation might corrupt data)
  * it is consistent with data model?
  * might be in given instance;
  * referential integrity (foreign keys);
  * logical consistency - when you have aggregated tables they might not be consistent with source tables all the time.
* consistency in read;
  * reading might be inconsistent if you have multiple partitions/disks;
  * might be in a given system (the whole cluster, not a single instance);
  * what is latency between commit and write to disk?
  * eventual consistency.

### Eventual consistency

If you have scaled servers - updated and created entries might be synced on replicas/shards with latency. Thus updating the value might happen on servers after some time - eventually. Caches also bring inconsistency.

## Durability

Process of write data into non-volatile storage. 
Even if we lost power or crashed after commit - we see that change.

Durability is slow.

Non-durable databases: Redis, H2

Techniques:
  * WAL - write-only ahead log;
    * deltas of changes;
    * every changes goes here immediately in case of slow changes (checking indexes, types, etc) that might not be committed in case of crash;
  * async snapshot:
    * as we write - we store everything in memory, but sometimes in background snapshot everything to disk.

### OS Cache

OS cache - when you write to disk - you ask OS to write it. OS actually writes to memory cache to batch those writes. It might lead to a situation when DB thinks the write was completed. If OS crashes - data will be lost.

**Fsync** - ask OS to always flush changes directly to disk. It's slower. But databases uses that since they should guarantee writes.
