# How tables and indexes are stored on disk

## row_id (tuple_id)

Usually databases don't work with ids provided by user and have system row_id for each row (Postgres). (MySQL InnoDB use primary key provided by user.)

## Page

Fixed-size memory location of multiple rows on disk.

* depending on storage model (row vs column) the rows are stored and read in logical pages;
* database doesn't read a single row, it reads a page or more in a single IO and we get a lot of rows in that IO;
* each page has a fixed size (8kb in postgres by default);
* database read whole page both on read and write;
* database has a cache for pages so if the same page requested multiple times - IO won't happen;
* page has a metadata at the beginning.

e.g. each page holds 3 rows - 1000 row is in page #333.

>> `SELECT *` or `SELECT column` choose doesn't matter much in row-based storage databases - you always read page with all columns from disk (serialization cost from bytes to data is still here though). 

But for column-based db select with columns might be faster.

## IO

IO - request to disk. 

* expensive: minimize as much as possible;
* can fetch 1 or more pages;
* can not read single row;
* some goes to OS cache instead of disk.

## Heap

Data structure where table is stored with all pages one after another (collection of pages). Slow storage on disk.

Expensive to query.

We need indexes that help us to find which part of heap to read. Which pages of heap we need to pull.

E.g. if id is index - row with id 1000 is on page 333, we don't need whole heap traversing for that.

## Index

Data structure separate from heap that has pointers to the heap.

* Part of the data to search quickly;
* tells exact page + row_id;
  * e.g. index `10 (1,0)` - entry with indexed value 10 is on row 1 and page 0.
* stored as pages and cost IO;
* the smaller the index the faster the search;
* small indices might be stored in-memory (even faster);
* often stored as b-trees to fasten the search even more.

* Sometimes heap table can be ordered around single index (clustered index/index organized table);
* Primary key might be a clustered index;
  * in MySQL it is;
  * in postgres all indexes are secondary (point to row_id);
  * need to be really careful with clustered indices since they are stored together and thus unique indices such as UUIDs will all be in separate pages. One of the best things to use as clustered index is date (not time!). 



